LocalIntel: Generating Organizational Threat Intelligence from Global and Local Cyber Knowledge Shaswata Mitra1[0009−0002−9722−5312], Subash Neupane1[0000−0001−9260−3914], Trisha Chakraborty1[0009−0002−8531−0667], Sudip Mittal1[0000−0001−9151−8347], Aritran Piplai2[0000−0002−6437−1324], Manas Gaur3[0000−0002−5411−2230], and Shahram Rahimi1[0000−0003−2779−0076] 1 Mississippi State University, MS, USA {sm3843, sn922, tc2006}@msstate.edu, {mittal, rahimi}@cse.msstate.edu 2 The University of Texas at El Paso, TX, USA apiplai@utep.edu 3 University of Maryland Baltimore County, MD, USA manas@umbc.edu Abstract. Security Operations Center (SoC) analysts gather threat reports from openly accessibleglobal threat repositories and tailor the information to their organization’s needs, such as developing threat intelligence and security policies. They also depend on organizational internal repositories, which act as privatelocal knowledge database . These local knowledge databases store credible cyber intelligence, critical operational and infrastructure details. SoCs undertake amanual labor-intensive task of utilizing these global threat repositories and local knowledge databases to create both organization-specific threat intelligence and mitigation policies. Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown the capability to process diverse knowledge sources efficiently. We leverage this ability to automate this organization-specific threat intelligence generation. We present LocalIntel, a novel automated threat intelligence contextualization framework that retrieves zero-day vulnerability reports from the global threat repositories and uses its local knowledge database to determine implications and mitigation strategies to alert and assist the SoC analyst.LocalIntel comprises two key phases:knowledge retrieval and contextualization. Quantitative and qualitative assessment has shown effectiveness in generating up to 93% accurate organizational threat intelligence with 64% inter-rater agreement. Keywords: Cybersecurity, Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI), Knowledge Contextualization, Generative AI, Large Language Model (LLM) 1 Introduction In 2023, there were 2,365 cyberattacks, with 29,0654 reported Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE)5. Cyber analysts in the Security Operations 4 URLs: bit.ly/3zccFKK and bit.ly/4g8bdKk arXiv:2401.10036v2 [cs.CR] 9 Feb 2025 2 S. Mitra et al. Center (SoC) retrieve malware samples from the internet. These samples are executed in sandboxes for behavior analysis. This analysis leads to developing defensive strategies to detect and prevent cyber-attacks that use such malware. The findings are shared publicly asgeneric cyber threat intelligence (CTI) in global threat repositories like CVE, National Vulnerability Database (NVD)5, Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE)5 or as third-party threat reports. Security analysts of an organization manually contextualize this generic knowledge to that organization’s unique operating conditions by considering factors like network, hardware & software specifics and business needs to protect from such cyber-attacks. Security measures such as policies and protocols are then deployed depending on this contextualized information to maintain secured operations. Organizations maintain this operating information and contextualized threat intelligence documented in theirlocal knowledge database. However, expeditiously developing appropriate contextualized reports is a critical challenge before deploying security policies. Manual generation not only consumes high costs but can also be erroneous and require plenty of time due to the volume and criticality of unstructured information. On the other hand, organizations must immediately integrate policies for any novel threat to safeguard operations. Failure oftimely and correct contextualized CTI generation for policy updation can incur heavy losses. Consider a couple of scenarios where either knowledge’s availability is insufficient.Scenario 1: An organization’s internal rules detect an unknown process attempting to communicate with an external server. The Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) team flags and blocks the process. However, without global CTI, they are unaware that this process is part of a larger ransomware campaign. Without this knowledge, the EDR team’s responseisinadequate,asitfailstorecognizeadditionalIndicatorsofCompromises (IoCs). A secondary payload may go undetected, encrypting the organization’s data. Scenario 2: During a routine penetration test, the software and corresponding versions used by the company are identified. Based on CVE/CWE data, the testers flag many software versions due to reported vulnerabilities. However, update log reveals that the flagged software has already been patched, making the alerts unnecessary. Modern IDEs or cybersecurity tools such as Nessus6 or Nexpose7 can instantly notify the SoC analyst regarding the zero-day vulnerability. However, these solutions cannot suggest accurate counteractions as they cannot assume organizational status since local knowledge resides within the organizational scope. Furthermore, organizations resist granting access to this local knowledge to a third-party vendor. This situation presents a challenge for SoC analysts as they are dealing with two sets of unstructured information. They may require more time to fully understand the context to develop the right policy before the vulnerability gets exploited in an active attack. To address this problem, we developedLocalIntel. Our motivation stems from the idea that an on-premise system capable of automatically generating 5 CVE: cve.mitre.org | CWE: cwe.mitre.org | NVD: nvd.nist.gov 6 Nessus: tenable.com/products/nessus 7 Nexpose: rapid7.com/products/nexpose LocalIntel 3 CVE-2024-2414:The primary channel is unprotected on Movistar 4G routeraffecting version ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This device has the 'adb' service open on port5555and provides access to a shell with root privileges. CVE-2024-2415:Command injection vulnerability in Movistar 4G router affecting version ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This vulnerability allows an authenticateduser to execute commands inside the router by making a POSTrequestto the URL '/cgi-bin/gui.cgi'. Configuration Wiki:Denver office complex (DEN.20.303) has Installed Movistar 4G router (DEN_MVS4_2023) ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820with ADBservice configured on port 22. Configuration Wiki:Z-tier_1.35 NAT server at DEN.20.303has WinSCPversion 5.17.10configured to port 5555. CVE-2024-2416:Cross-Site Request Forgery vulnerability in Movistar's 4G router affecting version ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This vulnerability allows an attacker to force an end user to execute unwanted actionsin a web applicationin which they are currently authenticated. Maintenance Tracker:Platform team atDEN.20.303will perform firmware updatefor DEN_MVS4_2023versioned ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820to ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.214140on August 15thMonday, 12-Aug-24 00:15:00 UTC and service might be unavailable due to the scheduled device restart and disabled authentication services. The Movistar 4G router (DEN_MVS4_2023) at the Denver office (DEN.20.303) has a vulnerability identified as CVE-2024-2414due to its accessible ADBservice, which provides root shell access, posing a significant security risk. While the ADB service is typically open on port 5555 globally, in this case, it is open on port 22 due to WinSCPconfiguration. Therefore, it is crucial to close port 22. In addition, all network trafficto the DEN.20.303 Movistar 4G routers should be suspendedfor scheduled maintenance on Monday, August 15th, 2024, at 00:15:00 UTC. It's important to note that during this period, the authentication service will be unavailable, potentially allowing users to exploitthe Command injection vulnerability (CVE-2024-2415) by making a POSTrequest to the URL '/cgi-bin/gui.cgi'. Generic Threat Intelligence(𝓖𝒊) Organizational Local Knowledge (𝓛𝒊) Contextualized CTI (𝓒)Global Threat Repository(𝓖) Local KnowledgeDatabase(𝓛) Local-Intel Fig.1: Overview of ourLocalIntel framework with an example use case. relevant and accurate organization-specific threat intelligence, which includes threat implications and counteractions, by assimilating global and local knowledge,wouldempowerSoCanalyststoquicklyunderstandtheeffectsofnewcyber threats on their infrastructure, thereby saving valuable time from the manual effort. Hence, SoC analysts can develop, modify, or update their cyber defense strategies in real-time, mitigating the risk of early cyber-attacks. Considering the diverse organizational infrastructure, we have designed ourLocalIntel framework to be modular, meaning the framework is customizable based on the use case. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first research that contextualizes global threat intelligence adapted for an organization-specific context. Our work makes the following contributions: –Wedemonstratethefeasibilityofproducingaccurateandrelevantorganizationspecific CTI from generic threat intelligence and its operational knowledge. –We built a knowledge-contextualization framework that generates real-time organizational CTI from publicly available and organizational knowledge. –We construct a prototype repository of local organizational knowledge and an evaluation dataset to assess the generation of contextualized CTI. –Through our evaluation dataset, we illustrateLocalIntel’s ability to generate precise organizational CTI using qualitative and quantitative metrics. In Section 2, we discuss the problem statement and theoretical foundations. Section 3 provides a detailed description of ourLocalIntel framework. The experiment and evaluation are presented in Section 4. Moving forward, Section 5 explores the related works. Concluding remarks are in Section 6. 4 S. Mitra et al. Table 1: Description of Notation. Notation Description {Gi|Gi ∈ G} Global Threat Repository {Li|Li ∈ L} Local Organizational Database Q Query to fetch global (Gi) & local (G) knowledge C Contextualized Completion 2 Research Objective & Theoretical Foundations Global threat repository (G = {G1, G2, ..., Gn}) is a publicly available set of online CTI reports (Gi). Local knowledge database (L = {L1, L2, ..., Ln}) consists of policies and procedures of an organization’s operating environments (Li), such as business requirements, trusted cyber intelligence, allowed system software list and version details, cyber knowledge about the organization, asset location and configurations, DMZ configurations, and maintenance reports. Problem Statement For a given set of vulnerabilityGi in G and corresponding relevant organizational knowledgeLi in L. The task is to generate Completion (C), which is the contextualized knowledge ofGi w.r.t. Li. C can be considered as contextualization function f (·), that translatesGi to organizational context usingLi. f (Gi, Li) = Ci∀Gi ∩ Li ̸= ϕ (1) For instance, in Figure 1, whereGi is a set containing information stating vulnerability (v) through process (p). Alternatively,Li contains information regarding the organization using process (p) for its operations and other relevant information. Hence, in the process of generating contextualized threat intelligence C considering v and p, Gi is being translated throughLi, whenGi ∩ Li ̸= ϕ. 3 LocalIntel Framework In this section, we explain our LocalIntel framework. We first explain our solution and each module with its functionality in detail (refer to Figure 3). Finally, we discuss the system implementation and module interactions to generate the final contextualized threat intelligenceC. 3.1 Solution Approach LocalIntel consists of two core phases: knowledge retrieval(Retrieval Phase) and generation(Generation Phase). In theretrieval phase, knowledge fromglobal (G) and local ( L) sources are retrieved, and in the generation phase, a final contextualized threat intelligenceC based on the retrieved knowledgeGi ∪ Li is generated. Refer to Figure 2 and Algorithm 1 for framework overview. LocalIntel 5 Start Zero-day Vulnerability End Local Knowledge Retriever Consolidated Knowledge LLM Contextualized Threat Intelligence Global Knowledge Retriever Relevant Global Knowledge LLM Search Query Retrieval Phase Generation Phase Contextulization Instruction Relevant Local Knowledge NER Request NER Request Fig.2: LocalIntel data-flow diagram. The zero-day vulnerability triggers the system to retrieve information from globalGi and local Li knowledge sources and then contextualizes the results, producing a final output CompletionC. Algorithm 1: LocalIntel Pseudo-code Input: Generic Threat Intelligence (Gi) Output: Contextualized Threat Intelligence (C) Retriev al Phase: Li ← execute_local_search(Gi, L) while Li ∩ Gi ̸= ϕ do Q ← get_search_query (Gi ∪ Li) forall α ∈ Q do Gi ← execute_global_search(α, G) Li ← execute_local_search(Gi, L) Genera tion Phase: C ← generate_completion(Gi ∪ Li) return C –In the Retrieval Phase, the system retrieves generic CTI Gi from G and relevant local knowledgeLi from L based on the relevancy. The system performs Named Entity Recognition (NER) to identify search keywords/queries Q over on the acquired knowledge (Gi ∪ L i). Then, it executes the search for all search queries inQ in the global knowledge repositoryG and local knowledge databaseL to fetch relevant threat reports and associated details. This phase continues until no additional knowledge is required (L ∩ Gi ̸= ϕ) to generate final contextualized threat intelligence. –Finally, in the Generation Phase, the system generates contextualized threat intelligence C for the zero-day vulnerability generic threat intelligence based on the retrieved global knowledge and local knowledge (Gi ∪ Li). 6 S. Mitra et al. 3.2 LocalIntel System Modules To implement LocalIntel, we first discuss system modules, which areGlobal Threat Repository (G), Local Knowledge Database ( L), Agent, Tools, LLM, with zero-day threat report inputGi and contextualized completionC) output. Global Threat Repository (G) refers to publicly available cybersecurity threat intelligence (CTI), such as threat reports from CVE, NVD, CWE, security blogs and bulletins, social media updates, and third-party reports. These repositories contain well-documented reports on cybersecurity threats, such as malware, vulnerability, cyber attacks, and many more. The primary purpose of these repositories is to facilitate information sharing among cybersecurity professionals regarding the latest developments. However, the global knowledgeGi is generic and may not directly apply to an organization’s needs as organizations tend to customize their infrastructure depending upon the business. Moreover, the knowledge obtained from unverifiable sources is only directly usable by an organization after thorough analysis.LocalIntel is expected to be connected to these threat repositories for automated zero-day vulnerability report retrieval. Local Knowledge Database (L) refers to an organizations’ operational information repository. Due to the generic characteristics,G contains a wide range of CTI, but they must be supplanted with organization-specific information to be useable. Hence, local knowledge databases or wikis are private knowledge repositories containing critical information related to organizational operations and trusted threat intelligence, such as specifics regarding the environment, operating systems, infrastructure, software, third-party systems, and processes. Confluence8, Notion9, are a few instances of such wiki platforms. The primary goal of these wikis is to facilitate structured development and knowledge sharing among the working professionals in an organization. Due to the unstructured nature of this information, we assume wiki platforms to be our local knowledge database. However, more structured sources like knowledge graphs can replace them with similar searching functionalities. Agent is the main controller in ourLocalIntel framework. It controls the overall flow, from receiving the input vulnerability report trigger to returning the final contextualized completion C. Specifically, the Agent’s function is to determine and regulate the sequence of actions among two phases for generating the output. The Agent actions are primarily of three types:Query generation, Query execution,and Completion generation.Toachievethis,theAgentinteracts with the other two modules:Tool and LLM, detailed following. –Query generation refers to generating search queries for information retrieval from either G or L. The Agent generates a search query to retrieve all the 8 Confluence: atlassian.com/software 9 Notion: notion.so/product/wikis LocalIntel 7 relevant information from pre-acquired knowledge (Gi ∪ Li). The Agent performs contextual embedding and keyword identification through named entity recognition (NER) to generate search queriesQ. –Query execution refers to executing search queryQ in global threat repository G and local knowledge databaseL to retrieve relevant knowledge. Due to the different characteristics ofG and L, the retrieval process can either be a keyword search through online API calls or a semantic similarity search. –Text generation can be considered an LLM inference scenario, where the Agent passes an input text to generate desired output text using LLM. Taskspecific input prompts are pre-designed in the Agent. Tool are functions that help the Agent execute some third-party actions. The actions can be diverse in type, for instance, making an online API call, performing a database search, executing custom scripts, invoking other software, and many more. However, for the scope of our research, tool functionality is limited to query generation using LLM, query execution through API calls and vector database search, and contextualized generation using LLM functionalities only. Therefore, in our LocalIntel framework, tools are responsible for executing online searches through API calls or vector database searches and parsing the results while bridging the Agent’s access to different framework modules. Large Language Model (LLM)acts as the brain of ourLocalIntel framework to process diverse information and generate contextualized CTI. Besides contextualized threat intelligence generation, it acts as the parser that processes retrieved knowledge to generate queries for structured information retrieval. Depending on the task, the Agent invokes LLM with instructions and information. Input: Zero-day threat report (Gi) refers to publicly available CTI reports regarding any discovered vulnerability or malware. We assume thatLocalIntel is connected with the global CTI repositories (G) with active triggers to receive any newly disclosed threat reports for instant processing. Output: Contextualized completion (C) is the real-time generated threat intelligence specifically tailored for an organization depending on its unique operating condition. The objective ofC is to assist SoC by providing mitigating strategies or relevant information on the specific zero-day threat (Gi). We assume the local knowledge database (L) contains all required organizational knowledge. 3.3 LocalIntel Implementation & Module Interactions Previously, we have described each module in the architecture. Here, we explain the implementation phases with intermediate module interactions (refer to Figure 3).LocalIntel initiates when a vulnerability report is received. The report can be pushed manually or via automated zero-day triggers. 8 S. Mitra et al. Specific KnowledgeRetrieval Request CVE-2024-2414:The primary channel is unprotected on Movistar 4G routeraffecting version ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This device has the 'adb' service open on port5555and provides access to a shell with root ...1 2Named Entity Recognition (NER) Request 3NER Response Global KnowledgeRepository / Internet Generic Knowledge Retrieval Query using Keywords6 Report 1 Similarity Matchingwith Prompt Retrieved Generic Knowledge76 Relevant Generic Knowledge Large Language Model (LLM)Agent Report N Vector DB LocalKnowledge Database Embedding Pre-processed Specific Knowledge Contextualization RAG Request 4 5Relevant Specific Knowledge Inst.Generic and Specific Knowledge 8 9Contextualized RAG Completion … block incoming traffic at port 22…9 Retrieval Phase Generation Phase Fig.3: LocalIntel framework module interaction in the two phases: knowledge retrieval, and contextualized threat intelligence generation. Processes are numbered in ascending execution order following the data-flow diagram (Fig. 2). Knowledge Retrieval (Phase 1):This is the first phase of our framework where the Agent retrieves generic threat intelligence (Gi). It generates search queries (Q) for relevant knowledge retrieval. The initial local knowledge search (refer to Algorithm 1) plays a crucial role in identifying whether the threat intelligence is relevant to the organization. If there is no overlap (Gi ∩ L = ϕ), then the Agent discards inputGi, as there are no connections; hence, it cannot be contextualized. Upon overlaps discovered, it iteratively generatesQ and executes knowledge retrieval from both global (G) and local (L) sources until all required knowledge needed to be considered for contextualization is retrieved. For the scope of our experiment, we implemented global knowledge retrieval from the Internet through keyword search via API endpoints of global threat repositories such as NIST, CVE, and ensemble [2] vector similarity search for local knowledge retrieval from the organizational wikis. This simplified approach efficiently fetches corresponding relevant knowledge from both sources. For instance, for the following threat intelligence, the execution is as follows: Invoked Generic Threat Intelligence (Gi) CVE-2024-2414: The primary channel is unprotected on Movistar 4G router affecting E version S_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This device has the ‘adb’ service open on port 5555 and provides access to a shell with root privileges. LocalIntel 9 Upon receiving Gi above, the Agent generates query embedding to perform ensemble retrieval inL. After executing Q in the vector-indexed L, the Agent identifies “Movistar 4G" to be the affecting device with following knowledge: Phase 1: NER Query Generation (Q) Agent Instruction: You are a named entity recognition (NER) tool. Given the following classes, perform NER for the provided Input text. Classes: software, device, library, functionality, attack_vector, vulnerability ... Input Threat Intelligence: CVE-2024-2414:TheprimarychannelisunprotectedonMovistar4Grouteraffecting E version S_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This device has the ‘adb’ service open on port 5555 and provides access to a shell with root privileges. Output Keywords: {"device": “Movistar 4G”, "attack_vector": “port 5555”, "functionality": “adb” } The semantic search is performed through vector embedding generation and execution of similarity matching algorithms (cosine, euclidean, dot-product). Phase 1: Retrieved Local Knowledge (Li) using QL Configuration Wiki:: – Denver office complex (DEN.20.303) has Installed Movistar 4G router (DEN_MVS4_2023) ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820 with ADB service configured on port 22. – Z-tier_1.35 NAT server at DEN.20.303 has WinSCP version 5.17.10 configured to port 5555. After searching L, the Agent performs similar query generationQ and execution iteratively inG and L for additional context retrieval. For this example, the additional retrieved knowledgeGi and Li from Phase 1 is below: Phase 1: Additional Global and Local Knowledge (Gi ∪ Li) Global Knowledge: –CVE-2024-2415: Command injection vulnerability in Movistar 4G router affecting versionES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This vulnerability allows an authenticated user to execute commands inside the router by making a POST request to the URL’/cgi-bin/gui.cgi’. –CVE-2024-2416: Cross-Site Request Forgery vulnerability in Movistar’s 4G router affecting versionES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This vulnerability allows an attacker to force an end user to execute unwanted actions in a web application in which they are currently authenticated. Local Knowledge: –Maintenance Tracker: Platform team atDEN.20.303 will perform firmware update for DEN_MVS4_2023 versioned ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820 to ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.214140on August 15thMonday, 12-Aug-2400:15:00 UTCand service might be unavailable due to the scheduled device restart and disabled authentication services. 10 S. Mitra et al. Consolidated knowledge (Gi ∪ L i) is passed for query generation. For this case, DEN.20.303 and DEN_MVS4_2023 used to identify related information. Contextualized Generation (Phase 2): In this phase, upon complete retrieval of Gi ∪ Li, the Agent invokes LLM for final contextualization. Phase 2: Contextualized Organizational Threat Intelligence (C) Agent Instruction: You are an honest network security analyst. Given public threat intelligence reports fetched from trusted cybersecurity sources and organizational infrastructure and operations details. Generate a cyber threat intelligence report with all details, including the impact and mitigation strategies. Do not include any information that is not provided as additional knowledge. Retrieved Global Knowledge (Gi): –CVE-2024-2414: The primary channel is unprotected on Movistar 4G router affecting E version S_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This device has the ‘adb’ service open on port 5555 and provides access to a shell with root privileges. –CVE-2024-2415: Command injection vulnerability in Movistar 4G router affecting version ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This vulnerability allows an authenticated user to execute commands inside the router by making a POST request to the URL ’/cgi-bin/gui.cgi’. –CVE-2024-2416: Cross-Site Request Forgery vulnerability in Movistar’s 4G router affecting version ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820. This vulnerability allows an attacker to force an end user to execute unwanted actions in a web application in which they are currently authenticated. Retrieved Local Knowledge (Li): –Configuration Wiki: Denver office complex (DEN.20.303) has Installed Movistar 4G router (DEN_MVS4_2023) ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820 with ADB service configured on port 22 –Configuration Wiki: Z-tier_1.35 NAT server at DEN.20.303 has WinSCP version 5.17.10 configured to port 5555. – Maintenance Tracker : Platform team at DEN.20.303 will perform firmware update for DEN_MVS4_2023 versioned ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.201820 to ES_WLD71-T1_v2.0.214140on August 15thMonday, 12-Aug-2400:15:00 UTCand service might be unavailable due to the scheduled device restart and disabled authentication services. Contextualized Completion: The Movistar 4G router (DEN_MVS4_2023) at the Denver office (DEN.20.303) has a vulnerability identified asCVE-2024-2414 due to its accessible ADB service, which provides root shell access, posing a significant security risk.While the ADB service is typically open on port 5555 globally, in this case, it is open on port 22 due to WinSCP configuration. Therefore, it is crucial toclose port 22. In addition, allnetwork traffic to the DEN.20.303 Movistar 4G routers should be suspendedfor scheduled maintenance onMonday, August 15th, 2024, at 00:15:00 UTC. It’s important to note that during this period, theauthentication service will be unavailable, potentially allowing users to exploit the Command injection vulnerability (CVE-2024-2415) by making a POST request to the URL ’/cgi-bin/gui.cgi’. LocalIntel 11 After completing both phases, we can observe that through an initial local search, the agent identified the “Movistar 4G router” as the device of interest (Gi ∩ L) with additional relevant knowledge. Then, it iteratively retrieved additional threat intelligence (CVE-2024-2415 and CVE-2024-2416) for the device from G (we considered NVD as G for the experiment) and L (considered an organizational wiki) to obtain additional local context. The concatenation of knowledge prior to retrieval allowed the discovery of indirect relevant documents such as maintenance schedules. Without this knowledge, the mitigation strategy might become ineffective. Finally, by providing all relevant information (Gi ∪L i) and task instruction, the Agent invokes LLM for real-time organizationspecific threat intelligence generation. This relevant real-time update then equips SoC analysts with all relevant information without investing any time in manual investigation. The SoC analyst can then utilize this knowledge to take the necessary actions to safeguard the organization against imminent cyber threats. 4 Experiment and Evaluation In this section, we discuss our experiments and the achieved evaluation results. For our evaluations, we performed experiments considering 58 publicly available threat intelligence scenarios to demonstrate the feasibility of theLocalIntel framework and assess contextualization relevancy. For the global threat repository (G), we considered NVD-CVE data, and for the local knowledge database (L), a curated organizational wiki (PII anonymized for confidentiality). However, as described in Section 3,LocalIntel10 is modular, allowing flexibility to modify the modules depending on requirements and organization-specifics. For example, other generic threat intelligence sources can be integrated withG, different local knowledge sources such as knowledge graphs can be incorporated, and other generative language models can be adopted for a more controlled generation. Following, we will delve into the evaluation dataset and experiment setup. Finally, we will describe our evaluation measures and findings with justifications. 4.1 Data Description and Experiment Setup Our dataset includes (1)58 trigger/zero-day generic threat intelligence reports (Gi), (2) 5 organizational wikis resembling an organizational local knowledge database source (L), and (3)58 subject matter expert (SME) generated (manually unbiased) ground truth (C). A trigger (Gi) can be a report of any malware, vulnerability, attack vector, or security updates. For further automated relevant global knowledge retrieval,LocalIntel is connected with CVE API endpoints. The 58 trigger reports contain both positive and negative test cases. We gathered5 organizational wikiscorresponding to 5 real-time applications and curated them (PII removed) suitable to the research. For each 10 LocalIntel Repository: github.com/shaswata09/LocalIntel 12 S. Mitra et al. positive test scenario, we ensured the corresponding knowledge was present in the local knowledge database. In addition to the organizational wiki, we also collected 326 confidential organizational trusted CTI reports to allowLocal- Intel to retrieve more infrastructural context and threat implications. These reports offer detailed analyses and insights from security analysts studying various global cyber attacks within the organization. For negative test scenarios, there was no intersecting knowledge present inL i.e. Gi ∩ L = ϕ. In conducting our experiments, we tested with proprietaryGPT-3.5-turbo, and GPT-4o 11, and open-source meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf, meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1- 8B-Instruct, mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2, nvidia/Mistral-NeMo-Minitron- 8B-Base, Qwen/Qwen1.5-7B-Chat, AiMavenAi/AiMaven-Prometheus, senseable /WestLake-7B-v2, PetroGPT/WestSeverus-7B-DPO-v2 downloaded from huggingface.coas the LLM models. All models’ temperatures were deliberately kept default, and instructions prompts were set the same for neutral comparison. The global knowledge was retrieved from NVD-CVE sources through search API. For local knowledge retrieval, we store the 5 organizational wikis and 326 threat reports in a vector database (Chroma12). We segmented and organized the data into smaller chunks to enhance processing efficiency. In our experimental setup, we opted for a chunk size of 1500 with a chunk overlap of 150. We used the text-embedding-ada-00213 as our base model for embedding each chunk of data in Chroma DB and used Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) sorting for dense retrieval of relevant chunks. The experiment was performed over Intel i9-12900 with 24 GB GeForce RTX™ 3090Ti GPU and 128 GB of RAM. Table 2: Evaluation results of ourLocalIntel framework over following LLMs. Model Ragas (Sim.) GEval (Cor.) BertSc-F1 gpt-3.5-turbo 0.92 0.75 0.68 gpt-4o 0.91 0.75 0.66 qwen1.5-7b-chat 0.92 0.78 0.66 llama-3.1-8b-Instruct 0.85 0.46 0.53 westlake-7b-v2 0.92 0.69 0.65 llama2-7b-chat 0.91 0.69 0.65 mistral-7b-instruct-v2 0.90 0.67 0.63 prometheus-7b 0.93 0.71 0.66 westseverus-7b-dpo-v2 0.90 0.60 0.60 mistral-nemo-minitron-8b 0.84 0.56 0.55 11 GPT Models: platform.openai.com/docs 12 Chroma: trychroma.com 13 OpenAI Embedding: platform.openai.com/docs LocalIntel 13 Fig.4: Evaluation box-plot for CompletionC with respect to ground truth. 14 S. Mitra et al. 4.2 Quantitative Evaluation For the quantitative assessment of LocalIntel’s performance in generating contextually relevant organizational threat intelligenceC, we utilize three frameworks: Retrieval Augmented Generation Assessment (RAGAs) [3], G-EVAL [6], and BertScore [15]. Using these frameworks, we evaluate two metrics, including similarity and correctness. Similarity measures the semantic similarity between ground truth and C, while correctness measures answer correctness compared to ground truth as a combination of factuality and semantic similarity. Both metrics range from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating optimalC. In our case, RAGAs and BertScore is used to evaluate similarity, whereas G-EVAL is used to evaluate correctness ofC. Results of our evaluation is presented in Table 2. In our evaluation, the modelQwen1.5-7B-Chat performed the best, with the highest similarity score and the lowest standard deviation, as depicted in Fig 4. On the other hand, Mistral-NeMo-Minitron-8B-Base was the least-performing model. We found that ‘qwen’ was the most stable, which is essential in critical domains such as cybersecurity. Contrarily, ‘mistral-nemo’ showed lower accuracy and higher variance. This can be explained through Mistral’s sliding attention mechanism that struggles to retail critical information over longer contexts. We also discovered that due to the task criticality, llama 3.1 avoided suggesting a solution, indicating its cautious generation. We observed a similar trend with the ‘GPT 4o’ model. Another critical point to note is that we used a generic instruction prompt for all models, and it is also worth mentioning that modelspecific prompt engineering techniques may lead to even better results. 4.3 Qualitative Evaluation To justify our quantitative findings (refer to Section 4.2), we qualitatively evaluate the performance of LocalIntel in generating contextually relevant organizational threat intelligence through human evaluation. Given the expensive nature of human evaluation, we engage a panel of3 Subject Matter Experts (SMEs), including one security analyst and two cybersecurity researchers. We task these SMEs to evaluate the correctness of generated threat intelligence based on the 58 scenarios and ground truths explained in the preceding section. The SMEs were instructed to rate the correctness of the response on a scale of1 to5 ,where1representsanincorrectresponse,and5indicatesacorrectresponse. We then compare the inter-rater agreement using Fleiss Kappa [7] measure. The result of this evaluation shows an agreement score of0.6477 with a standard error of0.0767, indicating that the raters’ evaluations are not random and are generally aligned, and theysubstantially agree on thecorrectnessof the threat intelligence responses generated by LocalIntel. Moreover, qualitative results aligns closely with thequantitative results, justifying the evaluation. 5 Related Works In the last decade, within the realm of cybersecurity, NLP tasks over unstructured CTI text primarily encompassNamed Entity Recognition, text summariza- LocalIntel 15 tion, andanalysis of semantic relationships between entities [13], etc. Researchers have demonstrated numerous real-world applications using these techniques utilizing CTI gathered from diverse sources [9,11,12,8]. With the advancement of generative AI in this decade, the application horizon of CTI has proportionally expanded. Liu et al. [5] introduced a trigger-enhanced CTI (TriCTI) discovery system designed to identify actionable CTI automatically. They utilized a finetuned BERT with an intricate design to generate triggers, training the trigger vector based on sentence similarity. Similarly, in [1], the researchers employed a BERT classifier to map Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) to the MITRE ATT&CK framework. On the other hand, Niakanlahiji et al., [10], proposes an information retrieval system called SECCMiner utilizing various NLP techniques. With SECCMiner, unstructured APT reports can be analyzed, and critical security concepts (e.g., adversarial techniques) can be extracted. A question and answering model called LogQA that answers log-based questions in natural language form using base BERT model and large-scale unstructured log corpora is proposed by Huang et al. [4]. Recently, BERT has also been explored to generate contextualized embedding [14] in cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is a critical domain, and this specialized embedding enables language models to understand the context better. On top of the improvements mentioned, we attempt to integrate LLM to understand the problem context and generate real-time scope-specific threat intelligence while considering different factors. This work is the first attempt to generate complete CTI from diverse sources. 6 Conclusion This paper introduced LocalIntel, a novel framework that generates contextualized CTI uniquely tailored for an organization depending on its operations. LocalIntel is a valuable tool for SoC analysts due to its unique ability to seamlessly contextualize generic global threat intelligence specific to local operations. The main benefit of this system is its ability to efficiently customize global threat intelligence for local contexts, reducing the need for manual efforts. This gives SoC analysts the necessary information to concentrate on essential tasks, such as developing defensive strategies. We employed qualitative and quantitative evaluations to evaluateLocalIntel’s confidence in delivering accurate and relevant threat intelligence. The system exhibited remarkable proficiency in both evaluations, supported by human-generated ground truth responses. It achieved a remarkable RAGAs contextual similarity score of92% and a correctness score of 78%, with a low standard deviation. This underscores the feasibility of automated CTI generation using LLMs and ourLocalIntel’s robust performance and ability to generate relevant CTI. In the future, we plan to perform further performance improvement measures, such as developing task-specific retrievers and connecting with cybersecurity knowledge graphs as our local knowledge database for broader evaluations. Additionally, we plan to fine-tune LLMs as part of our performance improvement measures. 16 S. Mitra et al. Acknowledgments.This work was supported by PATENT Lab at the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Mississippi State University. The authors would like to thank SME’s for their assistance in qualitative evaluation. The views and conclusions are those of the authors. References 1. Alves, P.M., Geraldo Filho, P., Gonçalves, V.P.: Leveraging bert’s power to classify ttp from unstructured text. In: 2022 Workshop on Communication Networks and Power Systems (WCNPS). pp. 1–7. IEEE (2022) 2. Arabzadeh, N., Yan, X., Clarke, C.L.: Predicting efficiency/effectiveness trade-offs for dense vs. sparse retrieval strategy selection. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. pp. 2862– 2866 (2021) 3. Es, S., James, J., Espinosa-Anke, L., Schockaert, S.: Ragas: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15217 (2023) 4. Huang, S., Liu, Y., Fung, C., Qi, J., Yang, H., Luan, Z.: Logqa: Question answering in unstructured logs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11715 (2023) 5. Liu, J., Yan, J., Jiang, J., He, Y., Wang, X., Jiang, Z., Yang, P., Li, N.: Tricti: an actionable cyber threat intelligence discovery system via trigger-enhanced neural network. Cybersecurity5(1), 8 (2022) 6. Liu, Y., Iter, D., Xu, Y., Wang, S., Xu, R., Zhu, C.: G-eval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634 (2023) 7. McHugh, M.L.: Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochemia medica22(3), 276–282 (2012) 8. Mitra, S., Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Joshi, A.: Combating fake cyber threat intelligence using provenance in cybersecurity knowledge graphs. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). pp. 3316–3323. IEEE (2021) 9. Mittal, S., Das, P.K., Mulwad, V., Joshi, A., Finin, T.: Cybertwitter: Using twitter to generate alerts for cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities. In: 2016 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM). pp. 860–867. IEEE (2016) 10. Niakanlahiji, A., Wei, J., Chu, B.T.: A natural language processing based trend analysis of advanced persistent threat techniques. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). pp. 2995–3000. IEEE (2018) 11. Pingle, A., Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Joshi, A., Holt, J., Zak, R.: Relext: Relation extraction using deep learning approaches for cybersecurity knowledge graph improvement. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining. pp. 879–886 (2019) 12. Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Joshi, A., Finin, T., Holt, J., Zak, R.: Creating cybersecurity knowledge graphs from malware after action reports. IEEE Access 8, 211691– 211703 (2020) 13. Rahman, M.R., Mahdavi-Hezaveh, R., Williams, L.: A literature review on mining cyberthreat intelligence from unstructured texts. In: 2020 International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). pp. 516–525. IEEE (2020) 14. Ranade, P., Piplai, A., Joshi, A., Finin, T.: Cybert: Contextualized embeddings for the cybersecurity domain. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). pp. 3334–3342. IEEE (2021) 15. Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K.Q., Artzi, Y.: Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 (2019)